Added REORGANIZE PARTITION as a new feature (#11385)
pingcap/docs: partitioned-table.md

## Partition management

> For `LIST` and `RANGE` partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For List/List COLUMNS/Range/Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:
```
IMO we distinguished List/List COLUMNS the definition early in this article, it's better to clarify them here, so do Range/Range COLUMNS.

> For List/List COLUMNS/Range/Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For List, List COLUMNS, Range, and Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:
```

> For List, List COLUMNS, Range, and Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `LIST`, `LIST COLUMNS`, `RANGE`, `RANGE COLUMNS` partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:
```

> For `LIST`, `LIST COLUMNS`, `RANGE`, and `RANGE COLUMNS` partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `RANGE`, `RANGE COLUMNS`, `LIST`, and `LIST COLUMNS` partitioned tables, you can manage the partitions as follows:
```

 - Add partitions using the `ALTER TABLE <table name> ADD PARTITION (<partition specification>)` statement. 
 - Drop partitions using the `ALTER TABLE <table name> DROP PARTITION <list of partitions>` statement. 
  - Delete data from specified partitions using the `ALTER TABLE <table name> TRUNCATE PARTITION <list of partitions>` statement. 

> - Merge, split, or make other changes to the partitions using the `ALTER TABLE <table name> REORGANIZE PARTITION <list of partitions> INTO (<new partition definitions>)` statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Merge, split, or make other changes to the partitions using the `ALTER TABLE <table name> REORGANIZE PARTITION <list of partitions> INTO (<new partition definitions>)` statement.
```

Split a partition:
{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION `p1990to2010` INTO
(PARTITION p1990 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2010),
 PARTITION p2010 VALUES LESS THAN (2020),
 PARTITION p2020 VALUES LESS THAN (2030),
 PARTITION pMax VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l5_6 INTO
(PARTITION l5 VALUES IN (5),
 PARTITION l6 VALUES IN (6));
```

Merge partitions:
{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1950,p1950 INTO (PARTITION pBefore1960 VALUES LESS THAN (1960));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1,l2 INTO (PARTITION l1_2 VALUES IN (1,2));
```

Change the whole partitioning scheme:
{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1960,p1960,p1970,p1980,p1990,p2000,p2010,p2020,pMax INTO
(PARTITION p1800 VALUES LESS THAN (1900),
 PARTITION p1900 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1_2,l3,l4,l5,l6 INTO
(PARTITION lOdd VALUES IN (1,3,5),
 PARTITION lEven VALUES IN (2,4,6));
```

> Reorganize partition (including merging or splitting partitions) in the generic form changes a list of partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (LIST or RANGE [COLUMNS]). For RANGE [COLUMNS] partitioned tables, the list of partitions needs to be in a single range. One can only change the end of the range if it includes the last partition. If the end is changed and there exists rows that no longer fits, the DDL will fail with an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (LIST or RANGE [COLUMNS]). For RANGE [COLUMNS] partitioned tables, the list of partitions needs to be in a single range. You can only change the end of the range if it includes the last partition. If the end is changed and rows no longer fit, the DDL will fail with an error.
```

> Range partitions needs to be a single range:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Range partitions need to be a single range:

```

Reviewer 2: "Range partitions need to be a single range:" what does this mean? Would you please help confirm? @mjonss 

A REORGANIZE PARTITION clause can only merge adjacent partitions?

Author: Yes, for RANGE, it can only merge/reorganize adjacent partitions.

Reviewer 2: Ok, if so, can we update "Range partitions need to be a single range:" to "For Range partitions, a REORGANIZE PARTITION clause can only merge adjacent partitions."?

Author: yes, that sounds very good

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p1800,p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));
```

```
ERROR 8200 (HY000): Unsupported REORGANIZE PARTITION of RANGE; not a single range
```

> New partition definitions that does not accommodate all existing rows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New partition definitions must match the same range or set of values as the original definitions.
```

Author: New partitions can have a different range or list of different values, but the existing rows in the reorganized partitions must fit into the new partitions. Not sure how to express that.

Reviewer 2: How about "New partition definitions must cover the existing range or set of values so that existing rows can fit into the new partitions."?

(PARTITION p1800 VALUES LESS THAN (1900),
 PARTITION p1900 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1_2,l3,l4,l5,l6 INTO
(PARTITION lOdd VALUES IN (1,3,5),
 PARTITION lEven VALUES IN (2,4,6));
```

Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes the listed partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range type, or change the Range COLUMNS type to the Range type).

For Range partitions, you can reorganize only adjacent partitions.

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p1800,p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));
```

```
ERROR 8200 (HY000): Unsupported REORGANIZE PARTITION of RANGE; not adjacent partitions
```

For a Range partitioned table, to modify the end of the range, the new end defined in `VALUES LESS THAN` must cover the existing rows in the last partition. If the end is changed and existing rows no longer fit, an error is reported:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
INSERT INTO members VALUES (313, "John", "Doe", "2022-11-22", NULL);

> ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2050)); -- succeeds, since it covers the existing row

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2050)); -- succeeds, since it covers the existing rows
```

```

#### Reorganize partitions

Split a partition:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION `p1990to2010` INTO
(PARTITION p1990 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2010),
 PARTITION p2010 VALUES LESS THAN (2020),
 PARTITION p2020 VALUES LESS THAN (2030),
 PARTITION pMax VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l5_6 INTO
(PARTITION l5 VALUES IN (5),
 PARTITION l6 VALUES IN (6));
```

Merge partitions:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1950,p1950 INTO (PARTITION pBefore1960 VALUES LESS THAN (1960));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1,l2 INTO (PARTITION l1_2 VALUES IN (1,2));
```

Change the partitioning scheme definition:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1960,p1960,p1970,p1980,p1990,p2000,p2010,p2020,pMax INTO
(PARTITION p1800 VALUES LESS THAN (1900),
 PARTITION p1900 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1_2,l3,l4,l5,l6 INTO
(PARTITION lOdd VALUES IN (1,3,5),
 PARTITION lEven VALUES IN (2,4,6));
```

> Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (LIST or RANGE [COLUMNS]). For RANGE [COLUMNS] partitioned tables, the list of partitions needs to be in a single range. You can only change the end of the range if it includes the last partition. If the end is changed and rows no longer fit, the DDL will fail with an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range COLUMNS type). 

For Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, the list of partitions needs to be in a single range. You can only change the end of the range if it includes the last partition. If the end is changed and rows no longer fit, the DDL statements will fail with an error.
```

Range partitions needs to be a single range:
{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p1800,p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));
```

```

> ERROR 8200 (HY000): Unsupported REORGANIZE PARTITION of RANGE; not a single range

Reviewer 2: Btw, I still did not understand what "not a single range" mean here. Does it mean p1800 and p2000 are not in a single range?

Author: Yes, that is two separate ranges

Reviewer 2: If we run `ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p1800,p1900, p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));`, then there is no error?

- TiCDC: TiCDC replicates the `EXCHANGE PARTITION` operation when both partitioned and non-partitioned tables have primary keys or unique keys. Otherwise, TiCDC will not replicate the operation.
- TiDB Lightning and BR: do not perform the `EXCHANGE PARTITION` operation during import using TiDB Lightning or during restore using BR.

> ### Manage Range and List partitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manage Range/Range COLUMNS/List/List COLUMNS partitions
```
Ditto.

> ### Manage Range/Range COLUMNS/List/List COLUMNS partitions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Manage Range, Range COLUMNS, List, and List COLUMNS partitions
```

- For a Range partitioned table, to modify the end of the range, the new end defined in `VALUES LESS THAN` must cover the existing rows in the last partition. Otherwise, existing rows no longer fit and an error is reported:

    ```sql
    INSERT INTO members VALUES (313, "John", "Doe", "2022-11-22", NULL);
    ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2050)); -- This statement will work as expected, because 2050 covers the existing rows.
    ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2020)); -- This statement will fail with an error, because 2022 does not fit in the new range.
    ```

    ```
    ERROR 1526 (HY000): Table has no partition for value 2022
    ```

- For a List partitioned table, to modify the set of values defined for a partition, the new definition must cover the existing values in that partition. Otherwise, an error is reported:

    ```sql
    INSERT INTO member_level (id, level) values (313, 6);
    ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION lEven INTO (PARTITION lEven VALUES IN (2,4));
    ```

    ```
    ERROR 1526 (HY000): Table has no partition for value 6
    ```

> ### Hash partition management

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Manage Hash partitions
```

```

#### Reorganize partitions

Split a partition:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION `p1990to2010` INTO
(PARTITION p1990 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2010),
 PARTITION p2010 VALUES LESS THAN (2020),
 PARTITION p2020 VALUES LESS THAN (2030),
 PARTITION pMax VALUES LESS THAN (MAXVALUE));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l5_6 INTO
(PARTITION l5 VALUES IN (5),
 PARTITION l6 VALUES IN (6));
```

Merge partitions:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1950,p1950 INTO (PARTITION pBefore1960 VALUES LESS THAN (1960));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1,l2 INTO (PARTITION l1_2 VALUES IN (1,2));
```

Change the partitioning scheme definition:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION pBefore1960,p1960,p1970,p1980,p1990,p2000,p2010,p2020,pMax INTO
(PARTITION p1800 VALUES LESS THAN (1900),
 PARTITION p1900 VALUES LESS THAN (2000),
 PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));

ALTER TABLE member_level REORGANIZE PARTITION l1_2,l3,l4,l5,l6 INTO
(PARTITION lOdd VALUES IN (1,3,5),
 PARTITION lEven VALUES IN (2,4,6));
```

> Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range COLUMNS type). 

Reviewer 2: According to https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-table#list-columns-partitioning, it seems that we have the List COLUMNS type but do not have the Range COLUMNS type. @mjonss Would you please help check if the "Range COLUMNS type" here is correct? Thanks.

> Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range COLUMNS type). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range type). 
```

> Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range COLUMNS type). 

Author: ```suggestion
Reorganizing partitions (including merging or splitting partitions) changes partitions into a new set of partition definitions. It cannot change the type of partitioning (for example, change the List type to the Range type or Range Columns to Range type). 
```

> For Range COLUMNS partitioned tables, the list of partitions needs to be in a single range. You can only change the end of the range if it includes the last partition. If the end is changed and rows no longer fit, the DDL statements will fail with an error.

Reviewer 2: Would you please give an example of this? Does it mean the same thing as "For Range partitions, a REORGANIZE PARTITION clause can only merge adjacent partitions."?

For Range partitions, a REORGANIZE PARTITION clause can only merge adjacent partitions.

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE members REORGANIZE PARTITION p1800,p2000 INTO (PARTITION p2000 VALUES LESS THAN (2100));
```

```
ERROR 8200 (HY000): Unsupported REORGANIZE PARTITION of RANGE; not a single range
```

> New partition definitions must cover the existing range or set of values so that existing rows can fit into the new partitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New partition definitions must cover the existing range or set of values so that existing rows can fit into the new partitions.

```

```sql
CREATE TABLE members (
    id int,
    fname varchar(255),
    lname varchar(255),
    dob date,
    data json
)
PARTITION BY RANGE (YEAR(dob)) (
 PARTITION pBefore1950 VALUES LESS THAN (1950),
 PARTITION p1950 VALUES LESS THAN (1960),
 PARTITION p1960 VALUES LESS THAN (1970),
 PARTITION p1970 VALUES LESS THAN (1980),
 PARTITION p1980 VALUES LESS THAN (1990),
 PARTITION p1990 VALUES LESS THAN (2000));

CREATE TABLE member_level (
 id int,
 level int,
 achievements json
)
PARTITION BY LIST (level) (
 PARTITION l1 VALUES IN (1),
 PARTITION l2 VALUES IN (2),
 PARTITION l3 VALUES IN (3),
 PARTITION l4 VALUES IN (4),
 PARTITION l5 VALUES IN (5));
```

#### Drop partitions

```sql
ALTER TABLE members DROP PARTITION p1990;

ALTER TABLE member_level DROP PARTITION l5;
```

#### Truncate partitions

```sql
ALTER TABLE members TRUNCATE PARTITION p1980;

ALTER TABLE member_level TRUNCATE PARTITION l4;
```

#### Add partitions

```sql
ALTER TABLE members ADD PARTITION (PARTITION `p1990to2010` VALUES LESS THAN (2010));

ALTER TABLE member_level ADD PARTITION (PARTITION l5_6 VALUES IN (5,6));
```

> For a Range partitioned table, `ADD PARTITION` will append new partitions after the last existing partition. Compared with the existing partitions, the value defined in `VALUES LESS THAN` for new partitions must be increasing. Otherwise, an error is reported:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a Range partitioned table, `ADD PARTITION` will append new partitions after the last existing partition. Compared with the existing partitions, the value defined in `VALUES LESS THAN` for new partitions must be greater. Otherwise, an error is reported:
```
